docs/integrations/mongo/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Getting started with the MongoDB sink
description: "Learn how to synchronize onchain data to MongoDB with Apibara."
diataxis: explanation
updatedAt: 2024-02-13
---

# Getting started with the MongoDB sink

The MongoDB integration provides a way to mirror onchain data to a MongoDB
collection of your choice. Data is automatically inserted as it's produced by
the chain, and it's invalidated in case of chain reorganizations.

- The integration can be used to populate a collection with data from one or
  more networks or smart contracts.
- Create powerful analytics with MongoDB pipelines.
- Change how collections are queried without re-indexing.

## Installation

```bash [Terminal]
apibara plugins install sink-mongo
```

## Collection schema

The transformation step is required to return an array of objects. Data is
converted to BSON and then written to the collection. The MongoDB integration
adds a `_cursor` column to each record so that data can be invalidated in case
of chain reorganizations.

## Querying data

When querying data, you should always add the following property to your MongoDB filter
to ensure you get the latest value:

```ts
{
    "_cursor.to": null,
}
```

The next section contains information on why you need to add this condition to
your filter.

### Storage & Data Invalidation

Storing blockchain data poses an additional challenge since we must be able to
rollback the database state in case of chain reorganizations.
This integration adds an additional `_cursor` field to all documents to track
for which block range a piece of data is valid for.

```ts
type Cursor = {
  /** Block (inclusive) when this piece of data was created. */
  from: number;
  /** Block (exclusive) at which this piece of data became invalid. */
  to: number | null;
};
```

It follows that a field is valid at the most recent block if its `_cursor.to`
field is `null`.

**Example**: we're indexing an ERC-721 token with the following transfers:

- block: 1000, transfer from 0x0 to 0xA
- block: 1010, transfer from 0xA to 0xB
- block: 1020, transfer from 0xB to 0xC

If we put the token ownership on a timeline, it looks like the following diagram.

```txt
1000                    1010                  1020
--+-----------------------+---------------------+---- - - - - - - -
  [ { owner: "0xA }       )
                          [ { owner: "0xB" }    )
                                                [ { owner: "0xC" }
```

Which translates to the following documents in the MongoDB collection.

After the first transfer:

```json
[{ "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": null } }]
```

After the second transfer:

```json
[
  { "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": 1010 } },
  { "owner": "0xB", "_cursor": { "from": 1010, "to": null } }
]
```

And after the third transfer:

```json
[
  { "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": 1010 } },
  { "owner": "0xB", "_cursor": { "from": 1010, "to": 1020 } },
  { "owner": "0xC", "_cursor": { "from": 1020, "to": null } }
]
```

Commit message:

add note about mongo indices

docs/integrations/mongo/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Getting started with the MongoDB sink
description: "Learn how to synchronize onchain data to MongoDB with Apibara."
diataxis: explanation
updatedAt: 2024-02-13
---

# Getting started with the MongoDB sink

The MongoDB integration provides a way to mirror onchain data to a MongoDB
collection of your choice. Data is automatically inserted as it's produced by
the chain, and it's invalidated in case of chain reorganizations.

- The integration can be used to populate a collection with data from one or
  more networks or smart contracts.
- Create powerful analytics with MongoDB pipelines.
- Change how collections are queried without re-indexing.

## Installation

```bash [Terminal]
apibara plugins install sink-mongo
```

## Collection schema

The transformation step is required to return an array of objects. Data is
converted to BSON and then written to the collection. The MongoDB integration
adds a `_cursor` column to each record so that data can be invalidated in case
of chain reorganizations.

## Important indices

To ensure the best performance, you need to add the following indices to your
MongoDB collections. **This is especially important if you're indexing pending blocks**.

 - `_cursor.from`
 - `_cursor.to`

## Querying data

When querying data, you should always add the following property to your MongoDB filter
to ensure you get the latest value:

```ts
{
    "_cursor.to": null,
}
```

The next section contains information on why you need to add this condition to
your filter.

### Storage & Data Invalidation

Storing blockchain data poses an additional challenge since we must be able to
rollback the database state in case of chain reorganizations.
This integration adds an additional `_cursor` field to all documents to track
for which block range a piece of data is valid for.

```ts
type Cursor = {
  /** Block (inclusive) when this piece of data was created. */
  from: number;
  /** Block (exclusive) at which this piece of data became invalid. */
  to: number | null;
};
```

It follows that a field is valid at the most recent block if its `_cursor.to`
field is `null`.

**Example**: we're indexing an ERC-721 token with the following transfers:

- block: 1000, transfer from 0x0 to 0xA
- block: 1010, transfer from 0xA to 0xB
- block: 1020, transfer from 0xB to 0xC

If we put the token ownership on a timeline, it looks like the following diagram.

```txt
1000                    1010                  1020
--+-----------------------+---------------------+---- - - - - - - -
  [ { owner: "0xA }       )
                          [ { owner: "0xB" }    )
                                                [ { owner: "0xC" }
```

Which translates to the following documents in the MongoDB collection.

After the first transfer:

```json
[{ "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": null } }]
```

After the second transfer:

```json
[
  { "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": 1010 } },
  { "owner": "0xB", "_cursor": { "from": 1010, "to": null } }
]
```

And after the third transfer:

```json
[
  { "owner": "0xA", "_cursor": { "from": 1000, "to": 1010 } },
  { "owner": "0xB", "_cursor": { "from": 1010, "to": 1020 } },
  { "owner": "0xC", "_cursor": { "from": 1020, "to": null } }
]
```
